the project gutenberg ebook of salomé, by oscar wilde

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org


title: salomé
       a tragedy in one act

author: oscar wilde

illustrator: aubrey beardsley

translator: alfred, lord douglas

release date: may 12, 2013 [ebook #42704]

language: english


*** start of this project gutenberg ebook salomé ***




produced by marc d'hooghe at http://www.freeliterature.org
(images generously made available by the internet archive.)





[illustration: the woman in the moon]

[illustration: title page]


salomé

a tragedy in one act:

translated from the french of

oscar wilde,

with sixteen drawings by aubrey beardsley

london: john lane, the bodley head

new york: john lane company, mcmvii

[illustration: cover design]




    the persons of the play.

    herod antipas, tetrarch of judæa.
    jokanaan, the prophet.
    the young syrian, captain of the guard.
    tigellinus, a young roman.
    a cappadocian.
    a nubian.
    first soldier.
    second soldier.
    the page of herodias.
    jews, nazarenes, etc.
    a slave.
    naaman, the executioner.
    herodias, wife of the tetrarch.
    salomé, daughter of herodias.
    the slaves of salomé.




a note on "salomé."


"salomé" has made the author's name a household word wherever the
english language is not spoken. few english plays have such a
peculiar history. written in french in 1892 it was in full
rehearsal by madame bernhardt at the palace theatre when it was
prohibited by the censor. oscar wilde immediately announced his
intention of changing his nationality, a characteristic jest,
which was only taken seriously, oddly enough, in ireland. the
interference of the censor has seldom been more popular or more
heartily endorsed by english critics. on its publication in book
form "salomé" was greeted by a chorus of ridicule, and it may be
noted in passing that at least two of the more violent reviews
were from the pens of unsuccessful dramatists, while all those
whose french never went beyond ollendorff were glad to find in
that venerable school classic an unsuspected asset in their
education--a handy missile with which to pelt "salomé" and its
author. the correctness of the french was, of course, impugned,
although the scrip had been passed by a distinguished french
writer, to whom i have heard the whole work attributed. the
times, while depreciating the drama, gave its author credit for
a _tour de force_, in being capable of writing a french play for
madame bernhardt, and this drew from him the following letter:--

     the times, thursday, march 2, 1893, p. 4.

      mr. oscar wilde on "salomé."

      to the editor of the times.

      sir, my attention has been drawn to a review of
      "salomé" which was published in your columns last
      week. the opinions of english critics on a french work
      of mine have, of course, little, if any, interest for
      me. i write simply to ask you to allow me to correct a
      misstatement that appears in the review in question.

      the fact that the greatest tragic actress of any stage
      now living saw in my play such beauty that she was
      anxious to produce it, to take herself the part of the
      heroine, to lend to the entire poem the glamour of her
      personality, and to my prose the music of her
      flute-like voice--this was naturally, and always will
      be, a source of pride and pleasure to me, and i look
      forward with delight to seeing mme. bernhardt present
      my play in paris, that vivid centre of art, where
      religious dramas are often performed. but my play was
      in no sense of the words written for this great
      actress. i have never written a play for any actor or
      actress, nor shall i ever do so. such work is for the
      artisan in literature--not for the artist.

      i remain, sir, your obedient servant,

      oscar wilde.



when "salomé" was translated into english by lord alfred douglas,
the illustrator, aubrey beardsley, shared some of the obloquy
heaped on wilde. it is interesting that he should have found
inspiration for his finest work in a play he never admired and by
a writer he cordially disliked. the motives are, of course, made
to his hand, and never was there a more suitable material for
that odd tangent art in which there are no tactile values. the
amusing caricatures of wilde which appear in the _frontispiece_,
"enter herodias" and "the eyes of herod," are the only pieces of
vraisemblance in these exquisite designs. the colophon is a real
masterpiece and a witty criticism of the play as well.

on the production of "salomé" by the new stage club in may,
1905,[1] the dramatic critics again expressed themselves
vehemently, vociferating their regrets that the play had been
dragged from its obscurity. the obscure drama, however, had
become for five years past part of the literature of europe. it
is performed regularly or intermittently in holland, sweden,
italy, france, and russia, and it has been translated into every
european language, including the czech. it forms part of the
repertoire of the german stage, where it is performed more often
than any play by any english writer except shakespeare. owing,
perhaps, to what i must call its _obscure_ popularity in the
continental theatres, dr. strauss was preparing his remarkable
opera at the very moment when there appeared the criticisms to
which i refer, and since the production of the opera in dresden
in december, 1905, english musical journalists and correspondents
always refer to the work as founded on wilde's drama. that is the
only way in which they can evade an awkward truth--a palpable
contravention to their own wishes and theories. the music,
however, has been set to the actual words of "salomé" in madame
hedwig lachmann's admirable translation. the words have not been
transfigured into ordinary operatic nonsense to suit the score,
or the susceptibilities of the english people. i observe that
admirers of dr. strauss are a little mortified that the great
master should have found an occasion for composition in a play
which they long ago consigned to oblivion and the shambles of
aubrey beardsley. wilde himself, in a rhetorical period, seems to
have contemplated the possibility of his prose drama for a
musical theme. in "de profundis" he says: "the refrains, whose
recurring motifs make 'salomé' so like a piece of music, and bind
it together as a ballad."

he was still incarcerated in 1896, when mons. luigne poë produced
the play for the first time at the théâtre libre in paris, with
lina muntz in the title role. a rather pathetic reference to this
occasion occurs in a letter wilde wrote to me from reading:--

"please say how gratified i was at the performance of my play,
and have my thanks conveyed to luigne poë. it is something that
at a time of disgrace and shame i should still be regarded as an
artist. i wish i could feel more pleasure, but i seem dead to all
emotions except those of anguish and despair. however, please let
luigne poë know that i am sensible of the honour he has done me.
he is a poet himself. write to me in answer to this, and try and
see what lemaitre, bauer, and sarcey said of 'salomé.'"

the bias of personal friendship precludes me from praising or
defending "salomé," even if it were necessary to do so. nothing i
might say would add to the reputation of its detractors. its
sources are obvious; particularly flaubert and maeterlinck, in
whose peculiar and original style it is an essay. a critic, for
whom i have a greater regard than many of his contemporaries,
says that "salomé" is only a catalogue; but a catalogue can be
intensely dramatic, as we know when the performance takes place
at christie's; few plays are more exciting than an auction in
king street when the stars are fighting _for_ sisera.

it has been remarked that wilde confuses herod the great (_mat._
xi. 1), herod antipas (_mat._ xiv. 3), and herod agrippa (acts
xiii), but the confusion is intentional, as in mediæval mystery
plays herod is taken for a type, not an historical character, and
the criticism is about as valuable as that of people who
laboriously point out the anachronisms in beardsley's designs.
with reference to the charge of plagiarism brought against
"salomé" and its author, i venture to mention a personal
recollection.

wilde complained to me one day that someone in a well-known novel
had stolen an idea of his. i pleaded in defence of the culprit
that wilde himself was a fearless literary thief. "my dear
fellow," he said, with his usual drawling emphasis, "when i see a
monstrous tulip with four wonderful petals in someone else's
garden, i am impelled to grow a monstrous tulip with five
wonderful petals, but that is no reason why someone should grow a
tulip with only three petals." that was oscar wilde.

robert ross.


[1] a more recent performance of "salomé" (1906), by the literary
theatre club, has again produced an ebullition of rancour and
deliberate misrepresentation on the part of the dramatic critics,
the majority of whom are anxious to parade their ignorance of the
continental stage. the production was remarkable on account of
the beautiful dresses and mounting, for which mr. charles
ricketts was responsible, and the marvellous impersonation of
herod by mr. robert farquharson. wilde used to say that "salomé"
was a mirror in which everyone could see himself. the artist,
art; the dull, dulness; the vulgar, vulgarity.



[illustration]

list of the pictures by aubrey beardsley.

1. the woman in the moon. 2. title page. 3. cover design. 4. list
of the pictures. 5. the peacock skirt. 6. the black cape. 7. a
platonic lament. 8. john and salomé. 9. enter herodias. 10. the
eyes of herod. 11. the stomach dance. 12. the toilette of
salomé--i. 13. the toilette of salomé--ii. 14. the dancer's
reward. 15. the climax. 16. cul de lampe.


       *       *       *       *       *




cast of the performance of "salomé," represented in england for
the first time.

new stage club.

"salomé,"

by oscar wilde.

may 10th and 13th 1905.

     a young syrian captain -- mr. herbert alexander.
     page of herodias       -- mrs. gwendolen bishop.
     first soldier          -- mr. charles gee.
     second soldier         -- mr. ralph de rohan.
     cappadocian            -- mr. charles dalmon.
     jokanaan               -- mr. vincent nello.
     naaman, the executioner-- mr. w. evelyn osborn.
     salomé                 -- miss millicent murby.
     slave                  -- miss carrie keith.
     herod                  -- mr. robert farquharson.
     herodias               -- miss louise salom.
     tigellinus             -- mr. c.l. delph.
     slave                  -- miss stansfeld.
     first jew              -- mr. f. stanley smith.
     second jew             -- mr. bernhard smith.
     third jew              -- mr. john bate.
     fourth jew             -- stephen bagehot
     fifth jew              -- frederick lawrence.

scene--the great terrace outside the palace.




       *       *       *       *       *


scene.--_a great terrace in the palace of herod, set above the
banqueting-hall. some soldiers are leaning over the balcony. to
the right there is a gigantic staircase, to the left, at the
back, an old cistern surrounded by a wall of green bronze.
moonlight._

the young syrian

how beautiful is the princess salomé to-night!

the page of herodias

look at the moon! how strange the moon seems! she is like a woman
rising from a tomb. she is like a dead woman. you would fancy she
was looking for dead things.

the young syrian

she has a strange look. she is like a little princess who wears a
yellow veil, and whose feet are of silver. she is like a princess
who has little white doves for feet. you would fancy she was
dancing.

the page of herodias

she is like a woman who is dead. she moves very slowly.

[_noise in the banqueting-hall._]

first soldier

what an uproar! who are those wild beasts howling?

second soldier

the jews. they are always like that. they are disputing about
their religion.

first soldier

why do they dispute about their religion?

second soldier

i cannot tell. they are always doing it. the pharisees, for
instance, say that there are angels, and the sadducees declare
that angels do not exist.

first soldier

i think it is ridiculous to dispute about such things.

the young syrian

how beautiful is the princess salomé to-night!

the page of herodias

you are always looking at her. you look at her too much. it is
dangerous to look at people in such fashion. something terrible
may happen.


[illustration: the peacock skirt]


the young syrian

she is very beautiful to-night.

first soldier

the tetrarch has a sombre look.

second soldier

yes; he has a sombre look.

first soldier

he is looking at something.

second soldier

he is looking at some one.

first soldier

at whom is he looking?

second soldier

i cannot tell.

the young syrian

how pale the princess is! never have i seen her so pale. she is
like the shadow of a white rose in a mirror of silver.

the page of herodias

you must not look at her. you look too much at her.

first soldier

herodias has filled the cup of the tetrarch.

the cappadocian

is that the queen herodias, she who wears a black mitre sewn with
pearls, and whose hair is powdered with blue dust?

first soldier

yes; that is herodias, the tetrarch's wife.

second soldier

the tetrarch is very fond of wine. he has wine of three sorts.
one which is brought from the island of samothrace, and is purple
like the cloak of cæsar.

the cappadocian

i have never seen cæsar.

second soldier

another that comes from a town called cyprus, and is yellow like
gold.

the cappadocian

i love gold.

second soldier

and the third is a wine of sicily. that wine is red like blood.

the nubian

the gods of my country are very fond of blood. twice in the year
we sacrifice to them young men and maidens; fifty young men and
a hundred maidens. but it seems we never give them quite enough,
for they are very harsh to us.

the cappadocian

in my country there are no gods left. the romans have driven them
out. there are some who say that they have hidden themselves in
the mountains, but i do not believe it. three nights i have been
on the mountains seeking them everywhere. i did not find them.
and at last i called them by their names, and they did not come.
i think they are dead.

first soldier

the jews worship a god that you cannot see.

the cappadocian

i cannot understand that.

first soldier

in fact, they only believe in things that you cannot see.

the cappadocian

that seems to me altogether ridiculous.

the voice of jokanaan

after me shall come another mightier than i. i am not worthy so
much as to unloose the latchet of his shoes. when he cometh, the
solitary places shall be glad. they shall blossom like the lily.
the eyes of the blind shall see the day, and the ears of the deaf
shall be opened. the new-born child shall put his hand upon the
dragon's lair, he shall lead the lions by their manes.

second soldier

make him be silent. he is always saying ridiculous things.

first soldier

no, no. he is a holy man. he is very gentle, too. every day, when
i give him to eat he thanks me.

the cappadocian

who is he?

first soldier

a prophet.

the cappadocian

what is his name?

first soldier

jokanaan.

the cappadocian

whence comes he?

first soldier

from the desert, where he fed on locusts and wild honey. he was
clothed in camel's hair, and round his loins he had a leathern
belt. he was very terrible to look upon. a great multitude used
to follow him. he even had disciples.

the cappadocian

what is he talking of?

first soldier

we can never tell. sometimes he says terrible things, but it is
impossible to understand what he says.

the cappadocian

may one see him?

first soldier

no. the tetrarch has forbidden it.

the young syrian

the princess has hidden her face behind her fan! her little white
hands are fluttering like doves that fly to their dove-cots. they
are like white butterflies. they are just like white butterflies.

the page of herodias

what is that to you? why do you look at her? you must not look at
her.... something terrible may happen.

the cappadocian

[_pointing to the cistern._]

what a strange prison!

second soldier

it is an old cistern.

the cappadocian

an old cistern! it must be very unhealthy.

second soldier

oh no! for instance, the tetrarch's brother, his elder brother,
the first husband of herodias the queen, was imprisoned there for
twelve years. it did not kill him. at the end of the twelve years
he had to be strangled.

the cappadocian

strangled? who dared to do that?

second soldier

[_pointing to the executioner, a huge negro._]

that man yonder, naaman.

the cappadocian

he was not afraid?

second soldier

oh no! the tetrarch sent him the ring.

the cappadocian

what ring?

[illustration: the black cape]

second soldier

the death-ring. so he was not afraid.

the cappadocian

yet it is a terrible thing to strangle a king.

first soldier

why? kings have but one neck, like other folk.

the cappadocian

i think it terrible.

the young syrian

the princess rises! she is leaving the table! she looks very
troubled. ah, she is coming this way. yes, she is coming towards
us. how pale she is! never have i seen her so pale.

the page of herodias

do not look at her. i pray you not to look at her.

the young syrian

she is like a dove that has strayed.... she is like a narcissus
trembling in the wind.... she is like a silver flower.

[_enter salomé_.]

salomé

i will not stay. i cannot stay. why does the tetrarch look at me
all the while with his mole's eyes under his shaking eyelids? it
is strange that the husband of my mother looks at me like that.
i know not what it means. in truth, yes, i know it.

the young syrian

you have just left the feast, princess?

salomé

how sweet the air is here! i can breathe here! within there are
jews from jerusalem who are tearing each other in pieces over
their foolish ceremonies, and barbarians who drink and drink, and
spill their wine on the pavement, and greeks from smyrna with
painted eyes and painted cheeks, and frizzed hair curled in
twisted coils, and silent, subtle egyptians, with long nails of
jade and russett cloaks, and romans brutal and coarse, with their
uncouth jargon. ah! how i loathe the romans! they are rough and
common, and they give themselves the airs of noble lords.

the young syrian

will you be seated, princess?

the page of herodias

why do you speak to her? why do you look at her? oh! something
terrible will happen.

salomé

how good to see the moon! she is like a little piece of money,
you would think she was a little silver flower. the moon is cold
and chaste. i am sure she is a virgin, she has a virgin's beauty.
yes, she is a virgin. she has never defiled herself. she has
never abandoned herself to men, like the other goddesses.

the voice of jokanaan

the lord hath come. the son of man hath come. the centaurs have
hidden themselves in the rivers, and the sirens have left the
rivers, and are lying beneath the leaves of the forest.

salomé

who was that who cried out?

second soldier

the prophet, princess.

salomé

ah, the prophet! he of whom the tetrarch is afraid?

second soldier

we know nothing of that, princess. it was the prophet jokanaan
who cried out.

the young syrian

is it your pleasure that i bid them bring your litter, princess?
the night is fair in the garden.

salomé

he says terrible things about my mother, does he not?

second soldier

we never understand what he says, princess.

salomé

yes; he says terrible things about her.

[_enter a slave_.]

the slave

princess, the tetrarch prays you to return to the feast.

salomé

i will not go back.

the young syrian

pardon me, princess, but if you do not return some misfortune may
happen.

salomé

is he an old man, this prophet?

the young syrian

princess, it were better to return. suffer me to lead you in.

salomé

this prophet ... is he an old man?

first soldier

no, princess, he is quite a young man.

second soldier

you cannot be sure. there are those who say he is elias.

salomé

who is elias?

second soldier

a very ancient prophet of this country, princess.

the slave

what answer may i give the tetrarch from the princess?

the voice of jokanaan

rejoice not thou, land of palestine, because the rod of him who
smote thee is broken. for from the seed of the serpent shall come
forth a basilisk, and that which is born of it shall devour the
birds.

salomé

what a strange voice! i would speak with him.

first soldier

i fear it is impossible, princess. the tetrarch does not wish any
one to speak with him. he has even forbidden the high priest to
speak with him.

salomé

i desire to speak with him.

first soldier

it is impossible, princess.

salomé

i will speak with him.

the young syrian

would it not be better to return to the banquet?

salomé

bring forth this prophet.

                             [_exit the slave._]

first soldier

we dare not, princess.

salomé

[_approaching the cistern and looking down into it._]

how black it is, down there! it must be terrible to be in so
black a pit! it is like a tomb.... [_to the soldiers._] did you
not hear me? bring out the prophet. i wish to see him.

second soldier

princess, i beg you do not require this of us.

salomé

you keep me waiting!

first soldier

princess, our lives belong to you, but we cannot do what you have
asked of us. and indeed, it is not of us that you should ask this
thing.

salomé

[_looking at the young syrian._]

ah!

the page of herodias

oh! what is going to happen? i am sure that some misfortune will
happen.

salomé

[_going up to the young syrian._]

you will do this tiling for me, will you not, narraboth? you will
do this thing for me. i have always been kind to you. you will do
it for me. i would but look at this strange prophet. men have
talked so much of him. often have i heard the tetrarch talk of
him. i think the tetrarch is afraid of him. are you, even you,
also afraid of him, narraboth?

the young syrian

i fear him not, princess; there is no man i fear. but the
tetrarch has formally forbidden that any man should raise the
cover of this well.

salomé

you will do this thing for me, narraboth, and to-morrow when i
pass in my litter beneath the gateway of the idol-sellers i will
let fall for you a little flower, a little green flower.

the young syrian

princess, i cannot, i cannot.

salomé

[_smiling_.]

you will do this thing for me, narraboth. you know that you will
do this thing for me. and to-morrow when i pass in my litter by
the bridge of the idol-buyers, i will look at you through the
muslin veils, i will look at you, narraboth, it may be i will
smile at you. look at me, narraboth, look at me. ah! you know
that you will do what i ask of you. you know it well.... i know
that you will do this thing.

the young syrian

[_signing to the third soldier._]

let the prophet come forth.... the princess salomé desires to see
him.

salomé

ah!

the page of herodias

oh! how strange the moon looks. you would think it was the hand
of a dead woman who is seeking to cover herself with a shroud.

the young syrian

she has a strange look! she is like a little princess, whose eyes
are eyes of amber. through the clouds of muslin she is smiling
like a little princess.

[_the prophet comes out of the cistern. salomé looks at him and
steps slowly back._]

[illustration: a platonic lament]

jokanaan

where is he whose cup of abominations is now full? where is he,
who in a robe of silver shall one day die in the face of all the
people? bid him come forth, that he may hear the voice of him who
hath cried in the waste places and in the houses of kings.

salomé

of whom is he speaking?

the young syrian

you can never tell, princess.

jokanaan

where is she who having seen the images of men painted on the
walls, the images of the chaldeans limned in colours, gave
herself up unto the lust of her eyes, and sent ambassadors into
chaldea?

salomé

it is of my mother that he speaks.

the young syrian

oh, no, princess.

salomé

yes; it is of my mother that he speaks.

jokanaan

where is she who gave herself unto the captains of assyria, who
have baldricks on their loins, and tiaras of divers colours on
their heads? where is she who hath given herself to the young men
of egypt, who are clothed in fine linen and purple, whose shields
are of gold, whose helmets are of silver, whose bodies are
mighty? bid her rise up from the bed of her abominations, from
the bed of her incestuousness, that she may hear the words of him
who prepareth the way of the lord, that she may repent her of her
iniquities. though she will never repent, but will stick fast in
her abominations; bid her come, for the fan of the lord is in his
hand.

salomé

but he is terrible, he is terrible!

the young syrian

do not stay here, princess, i beseech you.

salomé

it is his eyes above all that are terrible. they are like black
holes burned by torches in a tyrian tapestry. they are like black
caverns where dragons dwell. they are like the black caverns of
egypt in which the dragons make their lairs. they are like black
lakes troubled by fantastic moons.... do you think he will speak
again?

the young syrian

do not stay here, princess. i pray you do not stay here.

salomé

how wasted he is! he is like a thin ivory statue. he is like an
image of silver. i am sure he is chaste as the moon is. he is
like a moonbeam, like a shaft of silver. his flesh must be cool
like ivory. i would look closer at him.

the young syrian

no, no, princess.

salomé

i must look at him closer.

the young syrian

princess! princess!

jokanaan

who is this woman who is looking at me? i will not have her look
at me. wherefore doth she look at me with her golden eyes, under
her gilded eyelids? i know not who she is. i do not wish to know
who she is. bid her begone. it is not to her that i would speak.

salomé

i am salomé, daughter of herodias, princess of judæa.

jokanaan

back! daughter of babylon! come not near the chosen of the lord.
thy mother hath filled the earth with the wine of her iniquities,
and the cry of her sins hath come up to the ears of god.

salomé

speak again, jokanaan. thy voice is wine to me.

the young syrian

princess! princess! princess!

salomé

speak again! speak again, jokanaan, and tell me what i must do.

jokanaan

daughter of sodom, come not near me! but cover thy face with a
veil, and scatter ashes upon thine head, and get thee to the
desert and seek out the son of man.

salomé

who is he, the son of man? is he as beautiful as thou art,
jokanaan?

jokanaan

get thee behind me! i hear in the palace the beating of the wings
of the angel of death.

the young syrian

princess, i beseech thee to go within.

jokanaan

angel of the lord god, what dost thou here with thy sword? whom
seekest thou in this foul palace? the day of him who shall die in
a robe of silver has not yet come.

[illustration: john and salomé]

salomé

jokanaan!

jokanaan

who speaketh?

salomé

jokanaan, i am amorous of thy body! thy body is white like the
lilies of a field that the mower hath never mowed. thy body is
white like the snows that lie on the mountains, like the snows
that lie on the mountains of judæa, and come down into the
valleys. the roses in the garden of the queen of arabia are not
so white as thy body. neither the roses in the garden of the
queen of arabia, the perfumed garden of spices of the queen of
arabia, nor the feet of the dawn when they light on the leaves,
nor the breast of the moon when she lies on the breast of the
sea.... there is nothing in the world so white as thy body. let
me touch thy body.

jokanaan

back! daughter of babylon! by woman came evil into the world.
speak not to me. i will not listen to thee. i listen but to the
voice of the lord god.

salomé

thy body is hideous. it is like the body of a leper. it is like a
plastered wall where vipers have crawled; like a plastered wall
where the scorpions have made their nest. it is like a whitened
sepulchre full of loathsome things. it is horrible, thy body is
horrible. it is of thy hair that i am enamoured, jokanaan. thy
hair is like clusters of grapes, like the clusters of black
grapes that hang from the vine-trees of edom in the land of the
edomites. thy hair is like the cedars of lebanon, like the great
cedars of lebanon that give their shade to the lions and to the
robbers who would hide themselves by day. the long black nights,
when the moon hides her face, when the stars are afraid, are not
so black. the silence that dwells in the forest is not so black.
there is nothing in the world so black as thy hair.... let me
touch thy hair.

jokanaan

back, daughter of sodom! touch me not. profane not the temple of
the lord god.

salomé

thy hair is horrible. it is covered with mire and dust. it is
like a crown of thorns which they have placed on thy forehead. it
is like a knot of black serpents writhing round thy neck. i love
not thy hair.... it is thy mouth that i desire, jokanaan. thy
mouth is like a band of scarlet on a tower of ivory. it is like a
pomegranate cut with a knife of ivory. the pomegranate-flowers
that blossom in the gardens of tyre, and are redder than roses,
are not so red. the red blasts of trumpets that herald the
approach of kings, and make afraid the enemy, are not so red.
thy mouth is redder than the feet of those who tread the wine in
the wine-press. thy mouth is redder than the feet of the doves
who haunt the temples and are fed by the priests. it is redder
than the feet of him who cometh from a forest where he hath slain
a lion, and seen gilded tigers. thy mouth is like a branch of
coral that fishers have found in the twilight of the sea, the
coral that they keep for the kings!... it is like the vermilion
that the moabites find in the mines of moab, the vermilion that
the kings take from them. it is like the bow of the king of the
persians, that is painted with vermilion, and is tipped with
coral. there is nothing in the world so red as thy mouth.... let
me kiss thy mouth.

jokanaan

never! daughter of babylon! daughter of sodom! never.

salomé

i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan. i will kiss thy mouth.

the young syrian

princess, princess, thou who art like a garden of myrrh, thou who
art the dove of all doves, look not at this man, look not at him!
do not speak such words to him. i cannot suffer them....
princess, princess, do not speak these things.

salomé

i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan.

the young syrian

ah! [_he kills himself and falls between salomé and jokanaan._]

the page of herodias

the young syrian has slain himself! the young captain has slain
himself! he has slain himself who was my friend! i gave him a
little box of perfumes and ear-rings wrought in silver, and now
he has killed himself! ah, did he not foretell that some
misfortune would happen? i, too, foretold it, and it has
happened. well i knew that the moon was seeking a dead thing, but
i knew not that it was he whom she sought. ah! why did i not hide
him from the moon? if i had hidden him in a cavern she would not
have seen him.

first soldier

princess, the young captain has just killed himself.

salomé

let me kiss thy mouth, jokanaan.

jokanaan

art thou not afraid, daughter of herodias? did i not tell thee
that i had heard in the palace the beatings of the wings of the
angel of death, and hath he not come, the angel of death?

[illustration: enter herodias]

salomé

let me kiss thy mouth.

jokanaan

daughter of adultery, there is but one who can save thee, it is
he of whom i spake. go seek him. he is in a boat on the sea of
galilee, and he talketh with his disciples. kneel down on the
shore of the sea, and call unto him by his name. when he cometh
to thee (and to all who call on him he cometh), bow thyself at
his feet and ask of him the remission of thy sins.

salomé

let me kiss thy mouth.

jokanaan

cursed be thou! daughter of an incestuous mother, be thou
accursed!

salomé

i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan.

jokanaan

i do no wish to look at thee. i will not look at thee, thou art
accursed, salomé, thou art accursed. [_he goes down into the
cistern._]

salomé

i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan; i will kiss thy mouth.

first soldier

we must bear away the body to another place. the tetrarch does
not care to see dead bodies, save the bodies of those whom he
himself has slain.

the page of herodias

he was my brother, and nearer to me than a brother. i gave him a
little box full of perfumes, and a ring of agate that he wore
always on his hand. in the evening we used to walk by the river,
among the almond trees, and he would tell me of the things of his
country. he spake ever very low. the sound of his voice was like
the sound of the flute, of a flute player. also he much loved to
gaze at himself in the river. i used to reproach him for that.

second soldier

you are right; we must hide the body. the tetrarch must not see
it.

first soldier

the tetrarch will not come to this place. he never comes on the
terrace. he is too much afraid of the prophet.

[_enter herod, herodias, and all the court._]

herod

where is salomé? where is the princess? why did she not return to
the banquet as i commanded her? ah! there she is!

herodias

you must not look at her! you are always looking at her!

herod

the moon has a strange look to-night. has she not a strange look?
she is like a mad woman, a mad woman who is seeking everywhere
for lovers. she is naked too. she is quite naked. the clouds are
seeking to clothe her nakedness, but she will not let them. she
shows herself naked in the sky. she reels through the clouds like
a drunken woman.... i am sure she is looking for lovers. does she
not reel like a drunken woman? she is like a mad woman, is she
not?

herodias

no; the moon is like the moon, that is all. let us go within....
you have nothing to do here.

herod

i will stay here! manesseh, lay carpets there. light torches,
bring forth the ivory tables, and the tables of jasper. the air
here is delicious. i will drink more wine with my guests. we must
show all honours to the ambassadors of cæsar.

herodias

it is not because of them that you remain.

herod

yes; the air is delicious. come, herodias, our guests await us.
ah! i have slipped! i have slipped in blood! it is an ill omen.
it is a very evil omen. wherefore is there blood here?... and
this body, what does this body here? think you i am like the king
of egypt, who gives no feast to his guests but that he shows them
a corpse? whose is it? i will not look on it.

first soldier

it is our captain, sire. he is the young syrian whom you made
captain only three days ago.

herod

i gave no order that he should be slain.

second soldier

he killed himself, sire.

herod

for what reason? i had made him captain.

second soldier

we do not know, sire. but he killed himself.

herod

that seems strange to me. i thought it was only the roman
philosophers who killed themselves. is it not true, tigellinus,
that the philosophers at rome kill themselves?

tigellinus

there are some who kill themselves, sire. they are the stoics.
the stoics are coarse people. they are ridiculous people. i
myself regard them as being perfectly ridiculous.

herod

i also. it is ridiculous to kill oneself.

tigellinus

everybody at rome laughs at them. the emperor has written a
satire against them. it is recited everywhere.

herod

ah! he has written a satire against them? cæsar is wonderful. he
can do everything.... it is strange that the young syrian has
killed himself. i am sorry he has killed himself. i am very
sorry; for he was fair to look upon. he was even very fair. he
had very languorous eyes. i remember that i saw that he looked
languorously at salomé. truly, i thought he looked too much at
her.

herodias

there are others who look at her too much.

herod

his father was a king. i drove him from his kingdom. and you made
a slave of his mother, who was a queen, herodias. so he was here
as my guest, as it were, and for that reason i made him my
captain. i am sorry he is dead. ho! why have you left the body
here? i will not look at it--away with it! [_they take away the
body._] it is cold here. there is a wind blowing. is there not a
wind blowing?

herodias

no; there is no wind.

herod

i tell you there is a wind that blows.... and i hear in the air
something that is like the beating of wings, like the beating of
vast wings. do you not hear it?

herodias

i hear nothing.

herod

i hear it no longer. but i heard it. it was the blowing of the
wind, no doubt. it has passed away. but no, i hear it again. do
you not hear it? it is just like the beating of wings.

herodias

i tell you there is nothing. you are ill. let us go within.

herod

i am not ill. it is your daughter who is sick. she has the mien
of a sick person. never have i seen her so pale.

herodias

i have told you not to look at her.

herod

pour me forth wine [_wine is brought_]. salomé, come drink a
little wine with me. i have here a wine that is exquisite. cæsar
himself sent it me. dip into it thy little red lips, that i may
drain the cup.

salomé

i am not thirsty, tetrarch.

herod

you hear how she answers me, this daughter of yours?

herodias

she does right. why are you always gazing at her?

herod

bring me ripe fruits [_fruits are brought_]. salomé, come and eat
fruit with me. i love to see in a fruit the mark of thy little
teeth. bite but a little of this fruit and then i will eat what
is left.

salomé

i am not hungry, tetrarch.

herod

[_to herodias._] you see how you have brought up this daughter of
yours.

herodias

my daughter and i come of a royal race. as for thee, thy father
was a camel driver! he was also a robber!

herod

thou liest!

herodias

thou knowest well that it is true.

herod

salomé, come and sit next to me. i will give thee the throne of
thy mother.

salomé

i am not tired, tetrarch.

herodias

you see what she thinks of you.

herod

bring me--what is it that i desire? i forget. ah! ah! i remember.

[illustration: the eyes of herod]

the voice of jokanaan

lo! the time is come! that which i foretold has come to pass,
saith the lord god. lo! the day of which i spoke.

herodias

bid him be silent. i will not listen to his voice. this man is
for ever vomiting insults against me.

herod

he has said nothing against you. besides, he is a very great
prophet.

herodias

i do not believe in prophets. can a man tell what will come to
pass? no man knows it. moreover, he is for ever insulting me. but
i think you are afraid of him.... i know well that you are afraid
of him.

herod

i am not afraid of him. i am afraid of no man.

herodias

i tell you, you are afraid of him. if you are not afraid of him
why do you not deliver him to the jews, who for these six months
past have been clamouring for him?

a jew

truly, my lord, it were better to deliver him into our hands.

herod

enough on this subject. i have already given you my answer. i
will not deliver him into your hands. he is a holy man. he is a
man who has seen god.

a jew

that cannot be. there is no man who hath seen god since the
prophet elias. he is the last man who saw god. in these days god
doth not show himself. he hideth himself. therefore great evils
have come upon the land.

another jew

verily, no man knoweth if elias the prophet did indeed see god.
peradventure it was but the shadow of god that he saw.

a third jew

god is at no time hidden. he showeth himself at all times and in
everything. god is in what is evil even as he is in what is good.

a fourth jew

that must not be said. it is a very dangerous doctrine. it is a
doctrine that cometh from the schools at alexandria, where men
teach the philosophy of the greeks. and the greeks are gentiles:
they are not even circumcised.

a fifth jew

no one can tell how god worketh. his ways are very mysterious. it
may be that the things which we call evil are good, and that the
things which we call good are evil. there is no knowledge of any
thing. we must needs submit to everything, for god is very
strong. he breaketh in pieces the strong together with the weak,
for he regardeth not any man.

first jew

thou speaketh truly. god is terrible; he breaketh the strong and
the weak as a man brays corn in a mortar. but this man hath never
seen god. no man hath seen god since the prophet elias.

herodias

make them be silent. they weary me.

herod

but i have heard it said that jokanaan himself is your prophet
elias.

the jew

that cannot be. it is more than three hundred years since the
days of the prophet elias.

herod

there be some who say that this man is the prophet elias..

a nazarene

i am sure that he is the prophet elias.

the jew

nay, but he is not the prophet elias.

the voice of jokanaan

so the day is come, the day of the lord, and i hear upon the
mountains the feet of him who shall be the saviour of the world.

herod

what does that mean? the saviour of the world.

tigellinus

it is a title that cæsar takes.

herod

but cæsar is not coming into judæa. only yesterday i received
letters from rome. they contained nothing concerning this matter.
and you, tigellinus, who were at rome during the winter, you
heard nothing concerning this matter, did you?

tigellinus

sire, i heard nothing concerning the matter. i was explaining the
title. it is one of cæsar's titles.

herod

but cæsar cannot come. he is too gouty. they say that his feet
are like the feet of an elephant. also there are reasons of
state. he who leaves rome loses rome. he will not come. howbeit,
cæsar is lord, he will come if he wishes. nevertheless, i do not
think he will come.

first nazarene

it was not concerning cæsar that the prophet spake these words,
sire.

herod

not of cæsar?

first nazarene

no, sire.

herod

concerning whom then did he speak?

first nazarene

concerning messias who has come.

a jew

messiah hath not come.

first nazarene

he hath come, and everywhere he worketh miracles.

herodias ho! ho! miracles! i do not believe in miracles. i have
seen too many. [_to the page._] my fan!

first nazarene

this man worketh true miracles. thus, at a marriage which took
place in a little town of galilee, a town of some importance, he
changed water into wine. certain persons who were present related
it to me. also he healed two lepers that were seated before the
gate of capernaum simply by touching them.

second nazarene

nay, it was blind men that he healed at capernaum.

first nazarene

nay; they were lepers. but he hath healed blind people also, and
he was seen on a mountain talking with angels.

a sadducee

angels do not exist.

a pharisee

angels exist, but i do not believe that this man has talked with
them.

first nazarene

he was seen by a great multitude of people talking with angels.

a sadducee

not with angels.

herodias

how these men weary me! they are ridiculous! [_to the page._]
well! my fan! [_the page gives her the fan._] you have a
dreamer's look; you must not dream. it is only sick people who
dream. [_she strikes the page with her fan._]

second nazarene

there is also the miracle of the daughter of jairus.

first nazarene

yes, that is sure. no man can gainsay it.

herodias

these men are mad. they have looked too long on the moon. command
them to be silent.

herod

what is this miracle of the daughter of jairus?

first nazarene

the daughter of jairus was dead. he raised her from the dead.

herod

he raises the dead?

first nazarene

yea, sire, he raiseth the dead.

herod

i do not wish him to do that. i forbid him to do that. i allow no
man to raise the dead. this man must be found and told that i
forbid him to raise the dead. where is this man at present?

second nazarene

he is in every place, my lord, but it is hard to find him.

first nazarene

it is said that he is now in samaria.

a jew

it is easy to see that this is not messias, if he is in samaria.
it is not to the samaritans that messias shall come. the
samaritans are accursed. they bring no offerings to the temple.

second nazarene

he left samaria a few days since. i think that at the present
moment he is in the neighbourhood of jerusalem.

first nazarene

no; he is not there. i have just come from jerusalem. for two
months they have had no tidings of him.

herod

no matter! but let them find him, and tell him from me, i will
not allow him to raise the dead! to change water into wine, to
heal the lepers and the blind.... he may do these things if he
will. i say nothing against these things. in truth i hold it a
good deed to heal a leper. but i allow no man to raise the dead.
it would be terrible if the dead came back.

[illustration: the stomach dance]

the voice of jokanaan

ah! the wanton! the harlot! ah! the daughter of babylon with her
golden eyes and her gilded eyelids!--thus saith the lord god, let
there come up against her a multitude of men. let the people take
stones and stone her....

herodias

command him to be silent.

the voice of jokanaan

let the war captains pierce her with their swords, let them crush
her beneath their shields.

herodias

nay, but it is infamous.

the voice of jokanaan

it is thus that i will wipe out all wickedness from the earth,
and that all women shall learn not to imitate her abominations.

herodias

you hear what he says against me? you allow him to revile your
wife?

herod

he did not speak your name.

herodias

what does that matter? you know well that it is i whom he seeks
to revile. and i am your wife, am i not?

herod

of a truth, dear and noble herodias, you are my wife, and before
that you were the wife of my brother.

herodias

it was you who tore me from his arms.

herod

of a truth i was stronger.... but let us not talk of that matter.
i do not desire to talk of it. it is the cause of the terrible
words that the prophet has spoken. peradventure on account of it
a misfortune will come. let us not speak of this matter. noble
herodias, we are not mindful of our guests. fill thou my cup, my
well-beloved. fill with wine the great goblets of silver, and the
great goblets of glass. i will drink to cæsar. there are romans
here, we must drink to cæsar.

all

cæsar! cæsar!

herod

do you not see your daughter, how pale she is?

herodias

what is it to you if she be pale or not?

herod

never have i seen her so pale.

herodias

you must not look at her.

the voice of jokanaan

in that day the sun shall become black like sackcloth of hair,
and the moon shall become like blood, and the stars of the
heavens shall fall upon the earth like ripe figs that fall from
the fig-tree, and the kings of the earth shall be afraid.

herodias

ah! ah! i should like to see that day of which he speaks, when
the moon shall become like blood, and when the stars shall fall
upon the earth like ripe figs. this prophet talks like a drunken
man ... but i cannot suffer the sound of his voice. i hate his
voice. command him to be silent.

herod

i will not. i cannot understand what it is that he saith, but it
may be an omen.

herodias

i do not believe in omens. he speaks like a drunken man.

herod

it may be he is drunk with the wine of god.

herodias

what wine is that, the wine of god? from what vineyards is it
gathered? in what wine-press may one find it?

herod

[_from this point he looks all the while at salomé._]

tigellinus, when you were at rome of late, did the emperor speak
with you: on the subject of...?

tigellinus

on what subject, sire?

herod

on what subject? ah! i asked you a question, did i not? i have
forgotten what i would have asked you.

herodias

you are looking again at my daughter. you must not look at her. i
have already said so.

herod

you say nothing else.

herodias

i say it again.

herod

and that restoration of the temple about which they have talked
so much, will anything be done? they say the veil of the
sanctuary has disappeared, do they not?

herodias

it was thyself didst steal it. thou speakest at random. i will
not stay here. let us go within.

herod

dance for me, salomé.

herodias

i will not have her dance.

salomé

i have no desire to dance, tetrarch.

herod

salomé, daughter of herodias, dance for me.

herodias

let her alone.

herod

i command thee to dance, salomé.

salomé

i will not dance, tetrarch.

herodias

[_laughing_].

you see how she obeys you.

herod

what is it to me whether she dance or not? it is naught to me.
to-night i am happy, i am exceeding happy. never have i been so
happy.

first soldier

the tetrarch has a sombre look. has he not a sombre look?

second soldier

yes, he has a sombre look.

herod

wherefore should i not be happy? cæsar, who is lord of the world,
who is lord of all things, loves me well. he has just sent me
most precious gifts. also he has promised me to summon to rome
the king of cappadocia, who is my enemy. it may be that at rome
he will crucify him, for he is able to do all things that he
wishes. verily, cæsar is lord. thus you see i have a right to be
happy. indeed, i am happy. i have never been so happy. there is
nothing in the world that can mar my happiness.

the voice of jokanaan

he shall be seated on this throne. he shall be clothed in scarlet
and purple. in his hand he shall bear a golden cup full of his
blasphemies. and the angel of the lord shall smite him. he shall
be eaten of worms.

herodias

you hear what he says about you. he says that you will be eaten
of worms.

herod

it is not of me that he speaks. he speaks never against me. it is
of the king of cappadocia that he speaks; the king of cappadocia,
who is mine enemy. it is he who shall be eaten of worms. it is
not i. never has he spoken word against me, this prophet, save
that i sinned in taking to wife the wife of my brother. it may be
he is right. for, of a truth, you are sterile.

herodias

i am sterile, i? you say that, you that are ever looking at my
daughter, you that would have her dance for your pleasure? it is
absurd to say that. i have borne a child. you have gotten no
child, no, not even from one of your slaves. it is you who are
sterile, not i.

herod

peace, woman! i say that you are sterile. you have borne me no
child, and the prophet says that our marriage is not a true
marriage. he says that it is an incestuous marriage, a marriage
that will bring evils.... i fear he is right; i am sure that he
is right. but it is not the moment to speak of such things. i
would be happy at this moment. of a truth, i am happy. there is
nothing i lack.

herodias

i am glad you are of so fair a humour to-night. it is not your
custom. but it is late. let us go within. do not forget that we
hunt at sunrise. all honours must be shown to cæsar's
ambassadors, must they not?

second soldier

what a sombre look the tetrarch wears.

first soldier

yes, he wears a sombre look.

herod

salomé, salomé, dance for me. i pray thee dance for me. i am sad
to-night. yes; i am passing sad to-night. when i came hither i
slipped in blood, which is an evil omen; and i heard, i am sure i
heard in the air a beating of wings, a beating of giant wings. i
cannot tell what they mean ... i am sad to-night. therefore dance
for me. dance for me, salomé, i beseech you. if you dance for me
you may ask of me what you will, and i will give it you, even
unto the half of my kingdom.

[illustration: the toilette of salomé--i]

salomé

[_rising._] will you indeed give me whatsoever i shall ask,
tetrarch?

herodias

do not dance, my daughter.

herod

everything, even the half of my kingdom.

salomé

you swear it, tetrarch?

herod

i swear it, salomé.

herodias

do not dance, my daughter.

salomé

by what will you swear, tetrarch?

herod

by my life, by my crown, by my gods. whatsoever you desire i will
give it you, even to the half of my kingdom, if you will but
dance for me. o, salomé, salomé, dance for me!

salomé

you have sworn, tetrarch.

herod

i have sworn, salomé.

salomé

all this i ask, even the half of your kingdom.

herodias

my daughter, do not dance.

herod

even to the half of my kingdom. thou wilt be passing fair as a
queen, salomé, if it please thee to ask for the half of my
kingdom. will she not be fair as a queen? ah! it is cold here!
there is an icy wind, and i hear ... wherefore do i hear in the
air this beating of wings? ah! one might fancy a bird, a huge
black bird that hovers over the terrace. why can i not see it,
this bird? the beat of its wings is terrible. the breath of the
wind of its wings is terrible. it is a chill wind. nay, but it is
not cold, it is hot. i am choking. pour water on my hands. give
me snow to eat. loosen my mantle. quick! quick! loosen my mantle.
nay, but leave it. it is my garland that hurts me, my garland of
roses. the flowers are like fire. they have burned my forehead.
[_he tears the wreath from his head and throws it on the table._]
ah! i can breathe now. how red those petals are! they are like
stains of blood on the cloth. that does not matter. you must not
find symbols in everything you see. it makes life impossible. it
were better to say that stains of blood are as lovely as rose
petals. it were better far to say that.... but we will not speak
of this. now i am happy, i am passing happy. have i not the
right to be happy? your daughter is going to dance for me. will
you not dance for me, salomé? you have promised to dance for me.

[illustration: the toilette of salomé--ii]

herodias

i will not have her dance.

salomé

i will dance for you, tetrarch.

herod

you hear what your daughter says. she is going to dance for me.
you do well to dance for me, salomé. and when you have danced for
me, forget not to ask of me whatsoever you wish. whatsoever you
wish i will give it you, even to the half of my kingdom. i have
sworn it, have i not?

salomé

you have sworn it, tetrarch.

herod

and i have never broken my word. i am not of those who break
their oaths. i know not how to lie. i am the slave of my word,
and my word is the word of a king. the king of cappadocia always
lies, but he is no true king. he is a coward. also he owes me
money that he will not repay. he has even insulted my
ambassadors. he has spoken words that were wounding. but cæsar
will crucify him when he comes to rome. i am sure that cæsar will
crucify him. and if not, yet will he die, being eaten of worms.
the prophet has prophesied it. well! wherefore dost thou tarry,
salomé?

salomé

i am awaiting until my slaves bring perfumes to me and the seven
veils, and take off my sandals. [_slaves bring perfumes and the
seven veils, and take off the sandals of salomé._]

herod

ah, you are going to dance with naked feet. 'tis well!--'tis
well. your little feet will be like white doves. they will be
like little white flowers that dance upon the trees.... no, no,
she is going to dance on blood. there is blood spilt on the
ground. she must not dance on blood. it were an evil omen.

herodias

what is it to you if she dance on blood? thou hast waded deep
enough therein....

herod

what is it to me? ah! look at the moon! she has become red. she
has become red as blood. ah! the prophet prophesied truly. he
prophesied that the moon would become red as blood. did he not
prophesy it? all of you heard him. and now the moon has become
red as blood. do ye not see it?

herodias

oh, yes, i see it well, and the stars are falling like ripe figs,
are they not? and the sun is becoming black like sackcloth of
hair, and the kings of the earth are afraid. that at least one
can see. the prophet, for once in his life, was right, the kings
of the earth are afraid.... let us go within. you are sick. they
will say at rome that you are mad. let us go within, i tell you.

the voice of jokanaan

who is this who cometh from edom, who is this who cometh from
bozra, whose raiment is dyed with purple, who shineth in the
beauty of his garments, who walketh mighty in his greatness?
wherefore is thy raiment stained with scarlet?

herodias

let us go within. the voice of that man maddens me. i will not
have my daughter dance while he is continually crying out. i will
not have her dance while you look at her in this fashion. in a
word, i will not have her dance.

herod

do not rise, my wife, my queen, it will avail thee nothing. i
will not go within till she hath danced. dance, salomé, dance for
me.

herodias

do not dance, my daughter.

salomé

i am ready, tetrarch.

[_salomé dances the dance of the seven veils._]

herod

ah! wonderful! wonderful! you see that she has danced for me,
your daughter. come near, salomé, come near, that i may give you
your reward. ah! i pay the dancers well. i will pay thee royally.
i will give thee whatsoever thy soul desireth. what wouldst thou
have? speak.

salomé

[_kneeling_].

i would that they presently bring me in a silver charger....

herod

[laughing.]

in a silver charger? surely yes, in a silver charger. she is
charming, is she not? what is it you would have in a silver
charger, o sweet and fair salomé, you who are fairer than all the
daughters of judæa? what would you have them bring thee in a
silver charger? tell me. whatsoever it may be, they shall give it
you. my treasures belong to thee. what is it, salomé?

salomé

[_rising_].

the head of jokanaan.

herodias

ah! that is well said, my daughter.

herod

no, no!

herodias

that is well said, my daughter.

herod

no, no, salomé. you do not ask me that. do not listen to your
mother's voice. she is ever giving you evil counsel. do not heed
her.

salomé

i do not heed my mother. it is for mine own pleasure that i ask
the head of jokanaan in a silver charger. you hath sworn, herod.
forget not that you have sworn an oath.

herod

i know it. i have sworn by my gods. i know it well. but i pray
you, salomé, ask of me something else. ask of me the half of my
kingdom, and i will give it you. but ask not of me what you have
asked.

salomé

i ask of you the head of jokanaan.

herod

no, no, i do not wish it.

salomé

you have sworn, herod.

herodias

yes, you have sworn. everybody heard you. you swore it before
everybody.

herod

be silent! it is not to you i speak.

herodias

my daughter has done well to ask the head of jokanaan. he has
covered me with insults. he has said monstrous things against me.
one can see that she loves her mother well. do not yield, my
daughter. he has sworn, he has sworn.

herod

be silent, speak not to me!... come, salomé, be reasonable. i
have never been hard to you. i have ever loved you.... it may be
that i have loved you too much. therefore ask not this thing of
me. this is a terrible thing, an awful thing to ask of me.
surely, i think thou art jesting. the head of a man that is cut
from his body is ill to look upon, is it not? it is not meet
that the eyes of a virgin should look upon such a thing. what
pleasure could you have in it? none. no, no, it is not what you
desire. hearken to me. i have an emerald, a great round emerald,
which cæsar's minion sent me. if you look through this emerald
you can see things which happen at a great distance. cæsar
himself carries such an emerald when he goes to the circus. but
my emerald is larger. i know well that it is larger. it is the
largest emerald in the whole world. you would like that, would
you not? ask it of me and i will give it you.

[illustration: the dancer's reward]

salomé

i demand the head of jokanaan.

herod

you are not listening. you are not listening. suffer me to speak,
salomé.

salomé

the head of jokanaan.

herod

no, no, you would not have that. you say that to trouble me,
because i have looked at you all this evening. it is true, i have
looked at you all this evening. your beauty troubled me. your
beauty has grievously troubled me, and i have looked at you too
much. but i will look at you no more. neither at things, nor at
people should one look. only in mirrors should one look, for
mirrors do but show us masks. oh! oh! bring wine! i thirst....
salomé, salomé, let us be friends. come now!... ah! what would i
say? what was't? ah! i remember!... salomé--nay, but come nearer
to me; i fear you will not hear me--salomé, you know my white
peacocks, my beautiful white peacocks, that walk in the garden
between the myrtles and the tall cypress trees. their beaks are
gilded with gold, and the grains that they eat are gilded with
gold also, and their feet are stained with purple. when they cry
out the rain comes, and the moon shows herself in the heavens
when they spread their tails. two by two they walk between the
cypress trees and the black myrtles, and each has a slave to tend
it. sometimes they fly across the trees, and anon they crouch in
the grass, and round the lake. there are not in all the world
birds so wonderful. there is no king in all the world who
possesses such wonderful birds. i am sure that cæsar himself has
no birds so fair as my birds. i will give you fifty of my
peacocks. they will follow you whithersoever you go, and in the
midst of them you will be like the moon in the midst of a great
white cloud.... i will give them all to you. i have but a
hundred, and in the whole world there is no king who has peacocks
like unto my peacocks. but i will give them all to you. only you
must loose me from my oath, and must not ask of me that which you
have asked of me.

                        [_he empties the cup of wine._]

salomé

give me the head of jokanaan.

herodias

well said, my daughter! as for you, you are ridiculous with your
peacocks.

herod

be silent! you cry out always; you cry out like a beast of prey.
you must not. your voice wearies me. be silent, i say salomé,
think of what you are doing. this man comes perchance from god.
he is a holy man. the finger of god has touched him. god has put
into his mouth terrible words. in the palace as in the desert god
is always with him.... at least it is possible. one does not
know. it is possible that god is for him and with him.
furthermore, if he died some misfortune might happen to me. in
any case, he said that the day he dies a misfortune will happen
to some one. that could only be to me. remember, i slipped in
blood when i entered. also, i heard a beating of wings in the
air, a beating of mighty wings. these are very evil omens, and
there were others. i am sure there were others though i did not
see them. well, salomé, you do not wish a misfortune to happen to
me? you do not wish that. listen to me, then.

salomé

give me the head of jokanaan.

herod

ah! you are not listening to me. be calm. i--i am calm. i am
quite calm. listen. i have jewels hidden in this place--jewels
that your mother even has never seen; jewels that are marvellous.
i have a collar of pearls, set in four rows. they are like unto
moons chained with rays of silver. they are like fifty moons
caught in a golden net. on the ivory of her breast a queen has
worn it. thou shalt be as fair as a queen when thou wearest it. i
have amethysts of two kinds, one that is black like wine, and one
that is red like wine which has been coloured with water. i have
topazes, yellow as are the eyes of tigers, and topazes that are
pink as the eyes of a wood-pigeon, and green topazes that are as
the eyes of cats. i have opals that burn always, with an icelike
flame, opals that make sad men's minds, and are fearful of the
shadows. i have onyxes like the eyeballs of a dead woman. i have
moonstones that change when the moon changes, and are wan when
they see the sun. i have sapphires big like eggs, and as blue as
blue flowers. the sea wanders within them and the moon comes
never to trouble the blue of their waves. i have chrysolites and
beryls and chrysoprases and rubies. i have sardonyx and hyacinth
stones, and stones of chalcedony, and i will give them all to
you, all, and other things will i add to them. the king of the
indies has but even now sent me four fans fashioned from the
feathers of parrots, and the king of numidia a garment of ostrich
feathers. i have a crystal, into which it is not lawful for a
woman to look, nor may young men behold it until they have been
beaten with rods. in a coffer of nacre i have three wondrous
turquoises. he who wears them on his forehead can imagine things
which are not, and he who carries them in his hand can make women
sterile. these are great treasures above all price. they are
treasures without price. but this is not all. in an ebony coffer
i have two cups of amber, that are like apples of gold. if an
enemy pour poison into these cups, they become like an apple of
silver. in a coffer incrusted with amber i have sandals incrusted
with glass. i have mantles that have been brought from the land
of the seres, and bracelets decked about with carbuncles and with
jade that come from the city of euphrates.... what desirest thou
more than this, salomé? tell me the thing that thou desirest, and
i will give it thee. all that thou askest i will give thee, save
one thing. i will give thee all that is mine, save one life. i
will give thee the mantle of the high priest. i will give thee
the veil of the sanctuary.

the jews

oh! oh!

salomé

give me the head of jokanaan.

herod

[_sinking back in his seat_]. let her be given what she asks! of
a truth she is her mother's child! [_the first soldier
approaches. herodias draws from the hand of the tetrarch the ring
of death and gives it to the soldier, who straightway bears it to
the executioner. the executioner looks scared._] who has taken my
ring? there was a ring on my right hand. who has drunk my wine?
there was wine in my cup. it was full of wine. someone has drunk
it! oh! surely some evil will befall some one. [_the executioner
goes down into the cistern._] ah! wherefore did i give my oath?
kings ought never to pledge their word. if they keep it not, it
is terrible, and if they keep it, it is terrible also.

herodias

my daughter has done well.

herod

i am sure that some misfortune will happen.

salomé

[_she leans over the cistern and listens._]

there is no sound. i hear nothing. why does he not cry out, this
man? ah! if any man sought to kill me, i would cry out, i would
struggle, i would not suffer.... strike, strike, naaman, strike,
i tell you.... no, i hear nothing. there is a silence, a terrible
silence. ah! something has fallen upon the ground. i heard
something fall. it is the sword of the headsman. he is afraid,
this slave. he has let his sword fall. he dare not kill him. he
is a coward, this slave! let soldiers be sent. [_she sees the
page of herodias and addresses him._] come hither, thou wert the
friend of him who is dead, is it not so? well, i tell thee, there
are not dead men enough. go to the soldiers and bid them go down
and bring me the thing i ask, the thing the tetrarch has promised
me, the thing that is mine. [_the page recoils. she turns to the
soldiers._] hither, ye soldiers. get ye down into this cistern
and bring me the head of this man. [_the soldiers recoil._]
tetrarch, tetrarch, command your soldiers that they bring me the
head of jokanaan.

[_a huge black arm, the arm of the executioner, comes forth from
the cistern, bearing on a silver shield the head of jokanaan.
salomé seizes it. herod hides his face with his cloak. herodias
smiles and fans herself. the nazarenes fall on their knees and
begin to pray._]

ah! thou wouldst not suffer me to kiss thy mouth, jokanaan. well!
i will kiss it now. i will bite it with my teeth as one bites a
ripe fruit. yes, i will kiss thy mouth, jokanaan. i said it; did
i not say it? i said it. ah! i will kiss it now.... but,
wherefore dost thou not look at me, jokanaan? thine eyes that
were so terrible, so full of rage and scorn, are shut now.
wherefore are they shut? open thine eyes! lift up thine eyelids,
jokanaan! wherefore dost thou not look at me? art thou afraid of
me, jokanaan, that thou wilt not look at me?... and thy tongue,
that was like a red snake darting poison, it moves no more, it
says nothing now, jokanaan, that scarlet viper that spat its
venom upon me. it is strange, is it not? how is it that the red
viper stirs no longer?... thou wouldst have none of me, jokanaan.
thou didst reject me. thou didst speak evil words against me.
thou didst treat me as a harlot, as a wanton, me, salomé,
daughter of herodias, princess of judæa! well, jokanaan, i still
live, but thou, thou art dead, and thy head belongs to me. i can
do with it what i will. i can throw it to the dogs and to the
birds of the air. that which the dogs leave, the birds of the air
shall devour.... ah, jokanaan, jokanaan, thou wert the only man
that i have loved. all other men are hateful to me. but thou,
thou wert beautiful! thy body was a column of ivory set on a
silver socket. it was a garden full of doves and of silver
lilies. it was a tower of silver decked with shields of ivory.
there was nothing in the world so white as thy body. there was
nothing in the world so black as thy hair. in the whole world
there was nothing so red as thy mouth. thy voice was a censer
that scattered strange perfumes, and when i looked on thee i
heard a strange music. ah! wherefore didst thou not look at me,
jokanaan? behind thine hands and thy curses thou didst hide thy
face. thou didst put upon thine eyes the covering of him who
would see his god. well, thou hast seen thy god, jokanaan, but
me, me, thou didst never see. if thou hadst seen me thou wouldst
have loved me. i, i saw thee, jokanaan, and i loved thee. oh, how
i loved thee! i love thee yet, jokanaan, i love thee only.... i
am athirst for thy beauty; i am hungry for thy body; and neither
wine nor fruits can appease my desire. what shall i do now,
jokanaan? neither the floods nor the great waters can quench my
passion. i was a princess, and thou didst scorn me. i was a
virgin, and thou didst take my virginity from me. i was chaste,
and thou didst fill my veins with fire.... ah! ah! wherefore
didst thou not look at me, jokanaan? if thou hadst looked at me
thou hadst loved me. well i know that thou wouldst have loved me,
and the mystery of love is greater than the mystery of death.
love only should one consider.

[illustration: the climax]

herod

she is monstrous, thy daughter, she is altogether monstrous. in
truth, what she has done is a great crime. i am sure that it was
a crime against an unknown god.

herodias

i approve of what my daughter has done. and i will stay here now.

herod

[_rising_].

ah! there speaks the incestuous wife! come! i will not stay here.
come, i tell thee. surely some terrible thing will befall.
manasseh, issachar, ozias, put out the torches. i will not look
at things, i will not suffer things to look at me. put out the
torches! hide the moon! hide the stars! let us hide ourselves in
our palace, herodias. i begin to be afraid.

[_the slaves put out the torches. the stars disappear. a great
black cloud crosses the moon and conceals it completely. the
stage becomes very dark. the tetrarch begins to climb the
staircase._]

the voice of salomé

ah! i have kissed thy mouth, jokanaan, i have kissed thy mouth.
there was a bitter taste on thy lips. was it the taste of
blood?... but perchance it is the taste of love.... they say that
love hath a bitter taste.... but what of that? what of that? i
have kissed thy mouth, jokanaan.

[_a moonbeam falls on salomé covering her with light._]

herod

[_turning round and seeing salomé_.]

kill that woman!

[_the soldiers rush forward and crush beneath their shields
salomé, daughter of herodias, princess of judæa._]

curtain.


[illustration: cul de lampe]





end of the project gutenberg ebook of salomé, by oscar wilde

*** end of this project gutenberg ebook salomé ***

***** this file should be named 42704-8.txt or 42704-8.zip *****
this and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/2/7/0/42704/

produced by marc d'hooghe at http://www.freeliterature.org
(images generously made available by the internet archive.)


updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a united states copyright in these works, so the foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the united states without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  special rules,
set forth in the general terms of use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the project gutenberg-tm concept and trademark.  project
gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the ebooks, unless you receive specific permission.  if you
do not charge anything for copies of this ebook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  you may use this ebook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  they may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically anything with public domain ebooks.  redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** start: full license ***

the full project gutenberg license
please read this before you distribute or use this work

to protect the project gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "project
gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the full project
gutenberg-tm license available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


section 1.  general terms of use and redistributing project gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.a.  by reading or using any part of this project gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  if you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
if you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.e.8.

1.b.  "project gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  it may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  there are a few
things that you can do with most project gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  see
paragraph 1.c below.  there are a lot of things you can do with project
gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to project gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  see paragraph 1.e below.

1.c.  the project gutenberg literary archive foundation ("the foundation"
or pglaf), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of project
gutenberg-tm electronic works.  nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the united states.  if an
individual work is in the public domain in the united states and you are
located in the united states, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to project gutenberg
are removed.  of course, we hope that you will support the project
gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing project gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the project gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  you can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full project
gutenberg-tm license when you share it without charge with others.

1.d.  the copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  if you are outside the united states, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other project
gutenberg-tm work.  the foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the united
states.

1.e.  unless you have removed all references to project gutenberg:

1.e.1.  the following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full project gutenberg-tm license must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a project gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "project gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "project
gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

this ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  you may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the project gutenberg license included
with this ebook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.e.2.  if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the united states without paying any fees
or charges.  if you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "project gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.e.1
through 1.e.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
project gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.e.8 or
1.e.9.

1.e.3.  if an individual project gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.e.1 through 1.e.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  additional terms will be linked
to the project gutenberg-tm license for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.e.4.  do not unlink or detach or remove the full project gutenberg-tm
license terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with project gutenberg-tm.

1.e.5.  do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.e.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the project
gutenberg-tm license.

1.e.6.  you may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  however, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a project gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"plain vanilla ascii" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official project gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "plain vanilla ascii" or other
form.  any alternate format must include the full project gutenberg-tm
license as specified in paragraph 1.e.1.

1.e.7.  do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any project gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.e.8 or 1.e.9.

1.e.8.  you may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing project gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- you pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of project gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  the fee is
     owed to the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     project gutenberg literary archive foundation.  royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the project gutenberg literary archive foundation at the
     address specified in section 4, "information about donations to
     the project gutenberg literary archive foundation."

- you provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full project gutenberg-tm
     license.  you must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     project gutenberg-tm works.

- you provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.f.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- you comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of project gutenberg-tm works.

1.e.9.  if you wish to charge a fee or distribute a project gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the project gutenberg literary archive foundation and michael
hart, the owner of the project gutenberg-tm trademark.  contact the
foundation as set forth in section 3 below.

1.f.

1.f.1.  project gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the project gutenberg-tm
collection.  despite these efforts, project gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.f.2.  limited warranty, disclaimer of damages - except for the "right
of replacement or refund" described in paragraph 1.f.3, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation, the owner of the project
gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a project
gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  you agree that you have no remedies for negligence, strict
liability, breach of warranty or breach of contract except those
provided in paragraph 1.f.3.  you agree that the foundation, the
trademark owner, and any distributor under this agreement will not be
liable to you for actual, direct, indirect, consequential, punitive or
incidental damages even if you give notice of the possibility of such
damage.

1.f.3.  limited right of replacement or refund - if you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  if you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  the person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  if you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  if the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.f.4.  except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.f.3, this work is provided to you 'as-is', with no other
warranties of any kind, express or implied, including but not limited to
warranties of merchantability or fitness for any purpose.

1.f.5.  some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
if any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  the invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.f.6.  indemnity - you agree to indemnify and hold the foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the foundation, anyone
providing copies of project gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of project gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any project gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
project gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any defect you cause.


section  2.  information about the mission of project gutenberg-tm

project gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  it exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching project gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the project gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  in 2001, the project
gutenberg literary archive foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for project gutenberg-tm and future generations.
to learn more about the project gutenberg literary archive foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see sections 3 and 4
and the foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


section 3.  information about the project gutenberg literary archive
foundation

the project gutenberg literary archive foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the internal
revenue service.  the foundation's ein or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  contributions to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by u.s. federal laws and your state's laws.

the foundation's principal office is located at 4557 melan dr. s.
fairbanks, ak, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  its business office is located at 809
north 1500 west, salt lake city, ut 84116, (801) 596-1887.  email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

for additional contact information:
     dr. gregory b. newby
     chief executive and director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

section 4.  information about donations to the project gutenberg
literary archive foundation

project gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the irs.

the foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the united
states.  compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  we do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  to
send donations or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

while we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

international donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the united states.  u.s. laws alone swamp our small staff.

please check the project gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
to donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


section 5.  general information about project gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

professor michael s. hart was the originator of the project gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  for forty years, he produced and distributed project
gutenberg-tm ebooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

project gutenberg-tm ebooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as public domain in the u.s.
unless a copyright notice is included.  thus, we do not necessarily
keep ebooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

most people start at our web site which has the main pg search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

this web site includes information about project gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the project gutenberg literary
archive foundation, how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new ebooks.
 